# 🐹 MARMOT

Metagenomic Alignment and Reporting for Monitoring Of Threats
MARMOT is a modular pipeline for detecting potential pathogens from Nanopore sequencing data. It performs quality filtering, alignment, and summary reporting — making it easy to go from raw reads to actionable microbial insights.

## Table of Contents
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Updating the Reference Database](#updating-the-reference-database)
- [Output Structure](#output-structure)
- [Scripts Overview](#scripts-overview)
- [Post-Processing with Taxonkit](#post-processing-with-taxonkit)

## Updating the Reference Database

The emergent pathogen database should be updated regularly. The latest update was on **08/05/24**.
The reference database can be updated using the following scripts, usually on local machine with interent access.
Conda environment - `pathogen_database`
**`build_reference_database.sh`**
These scripts can be found in https://github.com/Mia-FGB/MARMOT_ref_db/tree/main

## Usage

To use the pipeline, ensure the `config_template.sh` script is configured correctly with the following parameters:


## Config file
| Parameter             | Explanation                                                                                         | Example |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|
| `sample`              | Name of the sample being processed. Used for labelling and organisation.                            | `CF_2023` |
| `location`            | Path to raw / rebasecalled reads. Should be the level above `fastq`.                               | `/ei/projects/9/9742f7cc-c169-405d-bf27-cd520e26f0be/data/raw/RL_24hCubTests_21092023/RL_24hCubTests_21092023/20230921_1707_X4_FAW72641_f261fc8c` |
| `filter_length`       | Reads shorter than this length will not be included in the analysis.                               | `300`   |
| `reference_database`  | Path to the reference database generated by `build_reference_database.sh`.                         | `/ei/projects/9/9742f7cc-c169-405d-bf27-cd520e26f0be/data/results/phibase/pathogen_database_080524.fa` |
| `scratch_dir`         | A directory for temporary large files to be stored. Can be the same as `output_dir`.               | `/ei/projects/9/9742f7cc-c169-405d-bf27-cd520e26f0be/scratch/pipeline_test` |
| `output_dir`          | Directory for output files.                                                                         | `/ei/projects/9/9742f7cc-c169-405d-bf27-cd520e26f0be/scratch/pipeline_test` |
| `barcode_list`        | List of barcodes to process. Can be a sequence or specific list.                                   | `$(seq -w 01 88)` or `("11" "02" "05" "08")` |
| `concatenated`        | Set to `"yes"` if the reads are already concatenated into one file, else `"no"`.                   | `yes`   |
| `contig_stats`        | Set to `"yes"` to calculate contig stats for the barcode, else `"no"`.                             | `yes`   |
| `genome_lengths_file` | File with TaxaIDs and genome lengths, generated by `build_reference_database.sh`.                  | `/ei/projects/9/9742f7cc-c169-405d-bf27-cd520e26f0be/data/results/phibase/080524_genome_lengths.tsv` |
| `risk_table_file` | File with DEFRA risk information, generated by `generate_risk_table.py` after creating database.                  | `/ei/projects/9/9742f7cc-c169-405d-bf27-cd520e26f0be/data/results/Pathogen_Database/Pathogen_Database_042025_v2/risk_table.csv` |
| `barcode_labels` | Tab delimited file with barcode number and SampleID to be used as labels in graph creation                 | `/ei/projects/9/9742f7cc-c169-405d-bf27-cd520e26f0be/data/results/Experiment/barcode_labels.tsv` |

---

### Submitting the Job Array

After configuring the file, submit your batch using the wrapper script:

```bash
./submit_with_config.sh config_template.sh
```

This wrapper will:
- Determine the number of barcodes from your config
- Create and submit a SLURM job array with the correct range (e.g. `--array=01-88`)
- Organise log files under `logs/<job_name>/`
- Submit the `write_files.sh` script to run after all the barcodes are complete, will populate the summarised files
- Create plots from the summarised output with the `create_risk_plots.R` script

## Output Structure

The pipeline generates the following output:
- **A directory for each barcode**
  - Containing result files
  - Log directory with output/error messages for the individual jobs.
  - Created in the specified output directory 
- **A log directory** storing output/error messages for each submission batch job.
  - Created where the job is submitted from
- **Above the barcode directories:**
  - In the specified output directory there are a number of summary files
  - `lcaparse_summary.txt`: Contains the Barcode, Read Count and % of reads assigned to each Taxa
  - `lcaparse_perread.txt`: 
  - `percent_reads_retained_length_filter.txt`: Percentage of reads retained after the removal of reads below the length filter threshold
  - `no_fail_reads.txt`: Number of fail reads per barcode from the nanopore sequeincing run 
    - Only created if fastq_fail directory is in the location input
  - `genome_coverage_all.txt`
  - `read_numbers.tsv`

- **Graphical Outputs**
Different graphical outputs inlcuded in for defra_risk/, pathogen_graphs/, and heatmap/ folders. 
Described in more detail below.



 ### Example Output Files for a Barcode Directory
  Each barcode directory contains the following example files:

  - **`02_barcode_percent_retained.txt`**: Percentage of reads retained after filtering.
  - **`02_contig_stats_filtered_300.txt`**: Contig statistics for reads filtered to a minimum length of 300bp.
  - **`02_read_no.tsv`**: Total pass reads before and after filtering
  - **`02_mapped.paf`**: Mapped reads in Pairwise Alignment Format (PAF).

  
## Scripts Overview

### `submit_with_config.sh`
Creates a temporary script using the config file to submit `submit_batch_jobs.sh` with specified parameters.
Also submits the `write_files.sh` script to run once all the barcodes are processed.

#### **Inputs:**
- Config file


### `submit_batch_jobs.sh`
Runs `single_barcode_process.sh` for each barcode provided.

#### **Outputs:**
- Unzipped fastq file of all pass reads
- Unzipped fastq file of all reads > filter length

---
### `single_barcode_process.sh`
Submits a sequence of sbatch jobs in the following order:
1. `prep_reads.sh`
2. `minimap2`
3. `paf_parse.py`
4. `run_lcaparse.sh`
5. `pathogen_genome_coverage_from_paf.py`

#### **Inputs:**
Provided via `submit_batch_jobs.sh`:
- Barcode number
- Location
- Filter length

#### **Outputs:**
- All outputs from `prep_reads.sh`, `minimap2`, and `paf_parse.py`
- `percent_retained_results.txt`: Percentage of reads retained after filtering
- `fail_number_all.txt`: Number of failed reads per barcode
- `number_ignored_reads_from_parse.txt`: Reads ignored due to multiple mapping or barcode issues

---
### `prep_reads.sh`
Unzips and concatenates pass reads, generates contig statistics, and applies length filtering.

#### **Inputs:**
- Barcode
- Raw read location
- Filter length (e.g., 300)

#### **Outputs:**
Located in `barcodeXX` directory:
- `XX_contig_stats.txt`
- `XX_barcode.fastq` (all pass reads)
- `XX_num_fail.txt` (number of failed reads, only possible if there is a fastq_fail directory)
In Scratch_Dir, above barcode directory 
- `XX_barcode_300bp.fastq` (Reads filtered >300bp)

---
### `paf_parse.py`
Processes mapped `.paf` files, filtering out low-quality mappings (MQ < 5) and handling multiple mappings intelligently.

#### **Inputs:**
- `XX_mapped.paf`

#### **Outputs:**
- `XX_taxaID_count.txt` (tab-delimited TaxaID & counts)
- `XX_ignored_reads_query_ID.txt` (query, MQ values, multiple Taxa IDs)
- `XX_number_ignored_reads.txt` (number of ignored reads)

---
### `create_risk_plots.R`
A R script to create plots from the pipeline summary outputs. To run on the HPC will need to set up an environment. 

####
1. **Install Mamba (if not already installed):**
Details on research computing website for instillation on NRP HPC
For detailed instructions on installing Mamba on the NRP HPC, see the [NRP Research Computing guide to Using Mamba](https://nbip-research-computing.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/CIS/pages/144343044/Using+Mamba).


2. **Create the environment:**  
You can create the environment from the `environment.yml` file:

  ```bash
  mamba env create -f environment.yml
  ```

3. **Activate the environment:**

  ```bash
  mamba activate r-marmot_env
  ```

#### **Inputs:**
- Path to output directory (from config) which contains these files generated by the earlier `write_files.sh` script
  - `lcaparse_perread.txt`: Read-level taxonomy assignments.
  - `genome_coverage_all.txt`: Genome coverage percentages per taxon.
  - `read_numbers.tsv`: Total and filtered read counts per barcode.
- Risk table, generated with `generate_risk_table.py` script whilst the reference database is created

#### **Outputs:**
Summary tables (in the input directory):
  - `genus_summary.tsv`: Normalized genus-level read counts per barcode.
  - `RedRisk_ReadIDs_all.tsv`: All read IDs matching high-risk species.
  - `RedRisk_ReadIDs_noWidespread.tsv`: As above, but excluding widespread UK-present species.
  - `RedRisk_Species_Summary.tsv`: Read counts and genome coverage for red risk species.
**Plots and graphs (inside Graphs/):**
defra_risk/:
  - HP100k_risk.svg: Stacked bar chart of reads per 100k for species with DEFRA-assigned risk categories.
  - HP100k_all.svg: Includes all species, even those without DEFRA classifications.
  - Filtered_HP100k_risk.svg: Same as above but normalized to filtered read count.
  - Filtered_HP100k_all.svg: All species, normalized to filtered read count.
  - *_facet.svg variants: Same as above, but faceted by presence in the UK.
pathogen_graphs/:
  - Individual bar plots per target genus (e.g., Fusarium_HP100k.svg) showing abundance across barcodes.
  - Facetted plots for all genera:
  - facet_pathogen_HP100k_fixed.svg
  - facet_pathogen_Filtered_HP100k_free_y.svg
Genome coverage plots, also in pathogen_graphs/::
  - One per genus with error bars.
  - Facetted plots across genera:
  - facet_coverage_fixed.svg, facet_coverage_free_y.svg
heatmap/:
  - Heatmaps of genus-level abundance:
  - genus_heatmap_HP100k_min50.svg
  - genus_heatmap_Filtered_HP100k_min100.svg
Colors are scaled log-wise using the viridis palette.




---
### **License & Citation**
Please cite this repository if you use it in your research. License details can be found in the repository.

For any issues or contributions, please submit a GitHub issue or pull request.


